Sjb/momentum nn paper (#70)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2022-10-03-MomentumResidualNeuralNetwork.md

---
layout: review
title: "Momentum Residual Neural Networks"
tags: Invertible ResNets
author: "Stéphanie Jehan-Besson"
cite:
    authors: "Michael E. Sander, Pierre Ablin, Mathieu Blondel, Gabriel Peyré"
    title:   "Momentum Residual Neural Networks"
    venue:   "ICML 2021"
pdf: "https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.07870.pdf" 
---

<!-- Do not include the following disclaimer in your own review -->

> # Reminders on Residual Neural Networks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Reminder on Residual Neural Networks
```

Seminal work on Residual Neural Network : ["Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition", K. He, X. Zhang, R. Zen and J. Sun, CVPR 2016](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1512.03385.pdf)

Main points:

* Deeper neural networks are more difficult to train

> * Residual learning framework have been introduced to ease the training of deeper networks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Residual learning framework has been introduced to ease the training of deeper networks
```

* Layers are reformulated as learning residual functions with reference to the previous layer inputs, instead of learning unreferenced functions.
* These residual networks are easier to optimize, and can gain accuracy from considerably increased depth.

# Highlights of the paper

> * Exploration of Memory costs issues in residual neural network due to backpropagation schemes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Exploration of memory costs issues in residual neural network due to backpropagation schemes
```

* Proposition of a new model, Momentum ResNets, which circumvents these memory issues by being invertible
* Compared to other invertible models, this model is simple to integrate into the usual ResNets architectures and provides a rigorous mathematical setting.
* Momentum ResNets can be interpreted as second order ordinary differential equations (ODEs).

> Momentum ResNets separate point clouds that ResNets fail to separate

Reviewer: Missing bullet here :wink: 
```suggestion
* Momentum ResNets separate point clouds that ResNets fail to separate
```

> ## Bibliography in the field 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is the appropriate place to put more bibliographic references. Maybe move this section at the end, as suggestions for further reading for people interested in the paper.

Author: This is fair. I dropped out the section.

* Momentum in deep networks : (He et al., 2020; Chun et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2020; Li et al. 2018) 

> * Second-order models : (Norcliffe et al., 2020; Rusch & Mishra, 2021; Lu et al.,2018; Massaroli et al., 2020) 

Reviewer: I know this might be tiresome to do, but maybe providing hyperlinks directly to the papers (preferably arXiv versions), would make the references much easier to look up for anyone interested.

# Introduction

> The main goal of this paper is to explore the properties of a new model, Momentum ResNets, that circumvent the memory issues of ResNets by being invertible. It lies on the modification of the ResNet's forward rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main goal of this paper is to explore the properties of a new model, Momentum ResNets, that circumvent the memory issues of ResNets by being invertible. It relies on the modification of the ResNet's forward rule.
```

> The main goal of this paper is to explore the properties of a new model, Momentum ResNets, that circumvent the memory issues of ResNets by being invertible. It lies on the modification of the ResNet's forward rule.

Reviewer 2: that circumvents the memory issues

# Momentum Residual Neural Networks

Backpropagation, used to optimize deep architectures, requires to store values at each layer during the network training.
In classical ResNets, we have the feedforward relation:

$$x_{n+1}=x_n+ f(x_n,\theta_n)$$

where $$\theta_n$$ is the set of parameters, and $$x_n$$ the activations at layer $$n$$. 

Memory issues occur when increasing the number of layers.

The authors propose to use momentum equations that replace the classical relation above:

> $$ v_{n+1}=\gamma v_n+(1-\gamma)f(x_n,\theta_n)$$

Reviewer 2: It can be interesting to say how v_0 is chosen and if the chosen value has an impact on the final result ?
I just have seen that you say something on this point in the result section ;) Maybe just mention this here !

Author: I will do it for the final version

$$x_{n+1}=x_n+v_{n+1}$$

where $$v$$ is a velocity term and $$\gamma$$ a momentum term.

The method consists in modifying the forward equations using the same parameters as inputs. This is invertible since we can recover the values of $$x_{n}$$ and $$v_{n}$$ using $$x_{n+1}$$ and $$v_{n+1}$$.
If we invert these equations, we get :

$$x_n=x_{n+1}-v_{n+1}$$

$$v_n=\frac{1}{\gamma} (v_{n+1}-(1-\gamma)f(x_n,\theta_n))$$

This avoids the memory issues occuring due to the backpropagation step.

Note: Momentum gradient descent is an alternative to classical gradient descent algorithms using second order partial derivatives.

> A overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms is given in the paper of S.Ruder (http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747) as mentioned in the paper.

Reviewer: - _A_ -> An
- Improve phrasing + formatting of the reference

```suggestion
An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms is given in a [review by S.Ruder](http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747), referenced in the paper.
```

## Memory cost

> For usual ResNets, one need to store the weights of the network and the values of all activations for the training set at each layer. The memory needed is $$O(k*d*n_{batch})$$ while for the Momentum ResNets the memory need is $$O((1-\gamma)*k*d*n_{batch})$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For usual ResNets, one needs to store the weights of the network and the values of all activations for the training set at each layer. The memory needed is $$O(k*d*n_{batch})$$ while for the Momentum ResNets the memory need is $$O((1-\gamma)*k*d*n_{batch})$$.
```

> For usual ResNets, one need to store the weights of the network and the values of all activations for the training set at each layer. The memory needed is $$O(k*d*n_{batch})$$ while for the Momentum ResNets the memory need is $$O((1-\gamma)*k*d*n_{batch})$$.

Reviewer 2: It would be great to precise what k and d mean in the equation

![](/collections/images/MomentumResNets/fig_memory_momentum.jpg)

## The role of momentum

> When $$\gamma=0$$, they get a Classical ResNet. When $$\gamma \rightarrow 1$$, they get a special case of the invertible RevNet (Gomez et al, 2017). 

Reviewer: Maybe add a link to the paper referenced here as well?

> When $$\gamma=0$$, they get a Classical ResNet. When $$\gamma \rightarrow 1$$, they get a special case of the invertible RevNet (Gomez et al, 2017). 

Reviewer 2: When gamma = 0, the equation of v_n is wrong since we have the factor 1/gamma ;)

> The advantage of the Momentum ResNet compared to RevNet where two learnable functions are used, is its stability for convergence (proofs given in the paper).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage of the Momentum ResNet compared to RevNet, where two learnable functions are used, is its stability for convergence (proofs given in the paper).
```

## Link with ODE (Ordinary Differential Equations)

![](/collections/images/MomentumResNets/fig_momentum_odes.jpg)
 

> ResNets can be interpreted as a first order ODE. Indeed the term $$x_{n+1} - x_n$$ can be seen as the discretized partial derivative $$\dot{x}$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ResNets can be interpreted as a first order ODE. Indeed, the term $$x_{n+1} - x_n$$ can be seen as the discretized partial derivative $$\dot{x}$$.
```

$$ \dot{x} \quad  \rightarrow  \quad x_{n+1}-x_{n}$$

Momentum ResNets can be interpreted as second-order ODEs by taking $$\epsilon=\frac{1}{1-\gamma}$$, they get:

$$ v_{n+1}=v_{n} + \frac{f(x_n,\theta_n) - v_n}{\epsilon} $$

$$ x_{n+1}=x_n+v_{n+1}$$

by replacing the term $$v_n$$, they find:

$$x_{n+1}-x_{n}=x_n-x_{n-1} + \frac{f(x_n,\theta_n)-v_n}{\epsilon}$$

The second order derivative $$\ddot{x}$$ can be discretized using $$x_{n+1}-2x_n+x_{n-1}$$ and then we can interpret the Momentum ResNets as a second order ODE of the form:

$$\epsilon \ddot{x}+\dot{x}=f(x,\theta)$$

> Briefly : "In the same way that ResNets can be seen as discretization of first order ODEs, Momentum ResNets can be seen as discretization of second-order ones."

Reviewer: I think a neat formatting trick to better emphasize this sentence would be to format at it has a quote (using ">" at the begining of the line):
```suggestion
>In the same way that ResNets can be seen as discretization of first order ODEs, Momentum ResNets can be seen as discretization of second-order ones.
```

When $$\epsilon \rightarrow 0$$, they get the first order model.

## Representation capabilies

> These analogies between ODEs lead to some interesting mathematical properties. The first order model can represent homeomorphism mappings (continuous, bijective with continuous inverse). However first order ODEs are not universal approximators and some mappings are not possible (see the example on point clouds separation). Momentum ResNets can capture non-homeomorphic dynamics. The authors present some proofs on this aspect called "representation capabilities" of models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These analogies between ODEs lead to some interesting mathematical properties. The first order model can represent homeomorphism mappings (continuous, bijective with continuous inverse). However, first order ODEs are not universal approximators and some mappings are not possible (see the example on point clouds separation). Momentum ResNets can capture non-homeomorphic dynamics. The authors present some proofs on this aspect called "representation capabilities" of models.
```

# Experiments

## Point clouds separation

* Experiments on 4 rings (2 classes) of point clouds 
![](/collections/images/MomentumResNets/momentum_points_clouds.jpg)

> These classes failed to be separated using classical ResNets but not with Momentum ResNets. 

Reviewer: I think a clearer way to phrase this would be:
```suggestion
Momentum ResNets are able to separate these classes, whereas classical ResNets fail.
```
